Vatican food waste, We Are Wasting a Massive Amount of Food.
Food waste might be finally getting the focus it deserves. From Washington D.C. to the Vatican, world leaders are stepping up their efforts to reduce food waste. In Washington D.C. last week, the US government announced a new Food Waste Reduction Alliance to formalize federal agency, food manufacturer and restaurant association collaboration to reduce food waste 50% by 2030.
And in Vatican City next week, the Pontifical Academy of Sciences is hosting a major summit on reducing food loss and waste, putting the issue front and center for the Catholic Church. This builds on Pope Francis¡¯s mantra that ¡°to throw food away means to throw people away¡± and the Catholic Church¡¯s teachings to ask for daily food for all ¨C that it¡¯s a moral obligation to ensure that everyone has enough food, which includes avoiding food loss and waste.
This doubling-down on food waste by world leaders is heartily welcomed. We¡¯re wasting too much food, money, opportunities and resources. Around the world, roughly one-third of all agricultural land produces food that is lost (in the production phase) or wasted (in the retail and consumption phase). That¡¯s more than 1.3 billion metric tons of edible food. And the entire supply chain is responsible, from poor climatic conditions to produce damaged at farms to improperly stored food to eating habits and more. When this food goes uneaten, we waste the water and energy needed to produce it, harvest it and bring it to market. And the economic, social and environmental impacts of this practice are devastating.
Economically speaking, this costs our communities dearly. Industrialized countries are losing $680 billion and developing countries are losing $310 billion. The financial hit to our economies, of this lost or wasted food, runs nearly $1 trillion dollars. To put this financial loss in perspective: If we wanted to deliver clean water and sanitation to the world for a year, it¡¯d cost only $150 billion. What a preventable waste, then, that could free up new monies for essential poverty-alleviating projects, which is the focus of the next section.
Socially speaking, the food wasted could feed the world if we better managed the food supply chain. The Food and Agricultural Organization found that ¡°consumers in rich countries waste almost as much food (222 million tonnes) as the entire net food production of sub-Saharan Africa (230 million tonnes)¡±. What an incredible waste, then, especially when over 800 million people go hungry. We must do better. The World Bank estimates that just a 1% reduction in post-harvest losses could yield gains of $40 million each year, the majority of which would go directly to small farmers growing the food while helping local economies. That¡¯s a win-win socially and economically.